title: FizzBuzz in CoffeeScript – a worked example
date: 2014/09/25 22:02:32
post_name: fizzbuzz-in-coffeescript-a-worked-example
---
# FizzBuzz in CoffeeScript – a worked example

CoffeeScript is well-documented, succinct language that compiles into JavaScript. If you're bored of JavaScript's abstruse syntax, it's a much more Ruby-like way to approach JavaScript programming – provided you're comfortable with its [caveats](https://donatstudios.com/CoffeeScript-Madness). This assumes you have [node.js installed](http://nodejs.org/download/) and have installed Mocha, CoffeeScript and Chai with the following commands from the folder you're working in: [code lang=shell] npm install coffee-script npm install chai npm install mocha [/code] You can also use the `-g` flag when running the above commands to install these packages globally, rather than locally. If you're using Mocha for tests, you need to 'register' a CoffeeScript compiler with Mocha first. [code lang=shell] mocha --compilers coffee:coffee-script/register [/code] You might also have to create a Mocha options file – /test/mocha.opts – and add the following line: `\--compilers coffee:coffee-script/register` Set up your folder structure like this: [code lang=text] ├── src │ └── fizzbuzz.coffee └── test ├── fizzbuzz_spec.coffee └── mocha.opts [/code] Now, let's write a test. `test/fizzbuzz_test.coffee`: [code lang=text] chai = require 'chai' expect = chai.expect Fizzbuzz = require '../src/fizzbuzz' describe 'Fizzbuzz', -> it '3 is divisible by 3', -> fizzbuzz = new Fizzbuzz() expect(fizzbuzz.isDivisibleByThree(3)).to.be.true it '1 is not divisible by 3', -> fizzbuzz = new Fizzbuzz() expect(fizzbuzz.isDivisibleByThree(1)).to.be.false [/code] (Note the capital 'F' in Fizzbuzz, because we're declaring a class.) Be careful of that third line above, though – if you have a fizzbuzz.js file it will use that instead of your fizzbuzz.coffee file! And now, the code: `src/fizzbuzz.coffee`: [code lang=text] class Fizzbuzz isDivisibleByThree: (number) -> number % 3 == 0 module.exports = Fizzbuzz [/code] And so on... you know how FizzBuzz goes. Here are our tests after a little bit of refactoring – note the `before` method: [code lang=text] chai = require 'chai' expect = chai.expect Fizzbuzz = require '../src/fizzbuzz' describe 'Fizzbuzz', -> before -> @fizzbuzz = new Fizzbuzz() it '3 is divisible by 3', -> expect(fizzbuzz.isDivisibleByThree(3)).to.be.true it '1 is not divisible by 3', -> expect(fizzbuzz.isDivisibleByThree(1)).to.be.false [/code] Note the @ sign in '@fizzbuzz' in the before function. This is like `this.fizzbuzz` in JavaScript – it creates the variable before assigning it.
